---
id: 368
title: Pan Pizza
date: 2013-05-28T08:17:00+00:00
author: matt
layout: post
image: 
  path: /assets/images/headers/2013-05-28-pan-pizza.jpg
  thumbnail: /assets/resized/480/images/headers/2013-05-28-pan-pizza.jpg
categories: food
tags:
  - pizza
  - pan pizza
  - cast iron
---
s much as I love thin crust NY style pizza, I saw a &#8220;fool proof&#8221; pan pizza recipe over at [serious eats](http://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2013/01/foolproof-pan-pizza-recipe.html) and wanted to try it out. &nbsp;Turns out, I&#8217;m a better fool than the recipe planned for. &nbsp;I prepared the dough a day before, and let it sit out overnight to rise, and when I checked in the morning I still had the same size, moist, ball of something that resembled dough. &nbsp;Something smelled off about it, so I decided to trash it and try again with a more tried and true recipe for bread dough that I&#8217;ve used before. &nbsp;I&#8217;m not going to share the bread recipe because it didn&#8217;t come out tasting very good for a pizza crust, but the basic ingredients included flour, yeast, salt, sugar. &nbsp;After mixing them all and kneading (thank you stand mixer) I let the dough rise.


{% responsive_image path: blogger/IMG_4039.jpg %}


My dough about doubled in size, which is good because I was a little worried that the yeast I used wasn&#8217;t active because I bought it in 2010. &nbsp;Finally with some dough to work with I went to work by pounding the dough a bit and coating a cast iron skillet in oil. &nbsp;I put the dough in and let it rise again for another hour or so.


{% responsive_image path: blogger/IMG_4044.jpg %}


I also let my oven preheat to 500F (I wish it went higher because I don&#8217;t think it even hits 500 on a good day). &nbsp;Add your toppings generously (after all this is a pretty thick crust) and cook for about 12-15mins.


{% responsive_image path: blogger/IMG_4051.jpg %}


It may look appetizing, and it wasn&#8217;t terrible, but it wasn&#8217;t great either. &nbsp;The cheese started to burn, and the crust was just barely done, not crispy golden brown I wanted. &nbsp;It also tasted like bread topped with sauce and cheese more than a pizza &#8211; which is understandable because I used a bread recipe to make the dough. &nbsp;Overall I put this in the &#8220;try again&#8221; category and move on &#8211; although it will probably be a long while until I try again because I make a pretty good thin crust pizza.
