---
id: 357
title: Ricotta
date: 2014-03-01T13:50:00+00:00
author: matt
layout: post
image: 
  path: /assets/images/headers/2014-03-01-ricotta.jpg
  thumbnail: /assets/resized/480/images/headers/2014-03-01-ricotta.jpg
categories: food
tags:
  - cheese
  - ricotta
---
<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">So this isn&#8217;t true ricotta because that&#8217;s made with stuff that is left over from making cheese, and I used whole milk and heavy cream. &nbsp;But the end result is pretty similar, and a bit better than ricotta you find at the grocery store, and it&#8217;s pretty easy to make. &nbsp;I&#8217;d make it all the time, except as I mentioned, it&#8217;s made using whole milk and heavy cream which means I&#8217;d have to work out twice as much to make up for it. &nbsp;Anyway, as for other ingredients just a little vinegar (or other acid &#8211; I might try lemon juice next time) and salt. &nbsp;


{% responsive_image path: blogger/IMG_4272.jpg %}


{% responsive_image path: blogger/heavy cream and some salt to a boil. &nbsp;Then add the vinegar (or other acid) and stir for a little bit while it curdles:


{% responsive_image path: blogger/IMG_4277.jpg %}


<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">Let it curdle, which seems wrong, but this is how cheese is made. &nbsp;I kind of like to forget that when eating cheese, so I pull a little doublethink and enjoy my cheese while in denial &#8211; even if I made it and saw it curdle. &nbsp;I wonder who first made cheese, thinking it would be a good idea to let milk curdle? &nbsp;Then again I suppose if you are hungry enough&#8230; &nbsp;Plus, cheesemonger is a pretty nifty job title. &nbsp;After the curdling you strain it. &nbsp;I used a cheesecloth but apparently you can use paper towel as well. &nbsp;Also I didn&#8217;t have a good way to support the cheese cloth with the ricotta in it so I ended up holding it over a pot for about 20mins. &nbsp;


{% responsive_image path: blogger/IMG_4281.jpg %}


<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">And you just drain it until your desired consistency and put it in the fridge for a couple hours. &nbsp;Although it does toughen up a little in the fridge. &nbsp;Mine came out closer to a cream cheese consistency. &nbsp;Still very good though. &nbsp;It was better than the store bought stuff, but didn&#8217;t last as long in the fridge, only a couple days.


{% responsive_image path: blogger/IMG_4283.jpg %}

<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">There it is in all it&#8217;s glory. &nbsp;Soon I&#8217;ll have to make some homemade pasta to go along with homemade ricotta. &nbsp;I probably won&#8217;t even use a sauce. &nbsp;Maybe more homemade cheese though. &nbsp;Even if it&#8217;s getting harder and harder to practice my doublethink about the milk curdling while enjoying it.</span>  
<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"><br /></span><span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"><br /></span><span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">Recipe:</span>  
<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"><br /></span><span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">-3 cups whole milk</span>  
<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">-1 cup heavy cream</span>  
<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">-1/2 teaspoon salt</span>  
<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">-3 tablespoons acid (vinegar, buttermilk, lemon juice)</span>  
<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"><br /></span><span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">Combine milk, heavy cream and salt into a saucepan. &nbsp;Bring to a boil and then remove from heat. &nbsp;Add acid and stir for a few seconds and then let the mixture curdle.</span>  
<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"><br /></span><span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;">Strain mixture using cheese cloth or paper towel until desired consistency (keep in mind it will firm up a bit in the fridge). &nbsp;I strained for about 20mins and it came out close to cream cheese. &nbsp;Cool in the fridge for a couple hours.&nbsp;</span>
