---
id: 328
title: 'Pikes Peak Ascent Attempt - Part 2: Training Update'
date: 2017-05-23T17:42:44+00:00
author: matt
layout: post
image: 
  path: /wp-content/uploads/2017/05/hillrepeats1.png
  thumbnail: /wp-content/uploads/2017/05/hillrepeats1-300x99.png
categories: races
tags:
  - colorado
  - elevation
  - mountain
  - pikes peak
  - run
  - training
---
Here&#8217;s an update on my training for my Pikes Peak run, yes I plan to run up Pikes Peak. Don&#8217;t worry there&#8217;s a trail.

<!--more-->

First a quick recap on why it&#8217;s difficult to run up Pikes Peak:

a) It&#8217;s a mountain. A tall mountain. Barr Trail (the trail I plan to run up) starts at over 6,000ft elevation &#8211; where the negative effects of high altitude can be felt just doing everyday things. The summit is at over 14,000ft, where there&#8217;s much less oxygen in the air than at sea level and the train that takes people up to the summit only stays for about 30mins because of the effects. This is particularly challenging for me because I&#8217;ve never been at an altitude where I would feel the effects so I don&#8217;t know how bad they&#8217;ll be. A quick reminder of the mountain:

{% responsive_image path: wp-content/uploads/2017/04/m_google_earth.jpg %}

b) It&#8217;s about 12 miles at an 11% grade. Even without the effects of altitude running up an 11% grade is tough, so tough many race courses with 1 or 2 hills at 11% and maybe 1/2 mile long are billed as &#8220;very hilly&#8221;.

c) Unpredictable weather. The average temperature difference between the base and summit is about 40ยบ F. Other logistical concerns include brining my own water and hoping it doesn&#8217;t snow. Seriously, there&#8217;s a chance of snow on the summit year round, and the average high in June is only 38ยบ F.

**Training
  
** 

My initial plan was to up my running volume, add hill repeats, add long bike rides, and add treadmill runs at an incline. After a couple weeks I am pretty happy with how it&#8217;s progressing, I&#8217;ve increased my running volume (more than doubled), added a hill repeats training session once a week, plan to do a couple longer bike rides this week and next week when the weather finally cooperates (it has been raining quite a bit). I even ran on the treadmill at an incline, once, for 20mins. It was horrible. Not only was it boring as only the treadmill can be, the incline made it hurt, and I was dripping sweat all over. I guess it wasn&#8217;t all that bad, but it&#8217;s much nicer to run outside. I&#8217;m happy with my progress so far and with about two solid weeks of training left before the trip I&#8217;m confident that if I can get used to or at least not collapse from the effects of altitude I can make the climb.

**Hill Repeats**

The hill repeats have been the most interesting added part of my training so far (there&#8217;s not much to say about longer runs other than they are longer), so I decided to add this section about them. Hill repeats are great for training, even for flat races, they stress your cardiovascular system and leg muscles (stress + recovery = improvements). They also help your leg muscles for climbing, which is pretty important for training to run up a mountain. The general idea is to find a long hill and run hard up the hill, like gasping for air hard, then jog easy back down, like barely faster than walking easy. I&#8217;ve been doing them at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sunken_Meadow_State_Park) which is where I used to run for cross country in high school. The cross country course has a famous hill named Cardiac Hill.

{% responsive_image path: wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Sunken-Meadow-5k.jpg %}

You can&#8217;t tell from the 5k course map, but the hill rises about 50-150ft depending on where you start and is about 1/10 to 1/3 of a mile, again depending on where you start. Very tame by Colorado mountain standards, but I&#8217;ve been running up and down it for the past month and it is formidable.

{% responsive_image path: wp-content/uploads/2017/05/sunkenmeadowsat.png)

Here&#8217;s a better picture of the hill, well at least one where you can understand a bit more after I explain it. The orange and red portions are the &#8220;hill&#8221; and together are about 0.35 miles long and rise about 150ft for an 8% grade, the red part is the steep section generally referred to when someone says Cardiac Hill and is about 0.1 miles long and rises about 50ft for a 10% grade. The green portion is the downhill recovery part of the repeats.

{% responsive_image path: wp-content/uploads/2017/05/hillrepeats2.png)

The above image is the elevation data from my watch from twelve repeats on the red section, starting after my warm up of about 1 mile you can see each spike where I reach to summit of nearly 200ft. Twelve of them. Yes if you actually count them there&#8217;s only 11 in the image, but the GPS on my watch cut out right as I was starting the 12th repeat. Pretty annoying. Anyway, the total elevation for this run measured 1,066ft over the total 5.3 miles. How does this compare to Pikes Peak? Just double the distance, multiply the elevation gain by 8, and that&#8217;s Pikes Peak (oh and get rid of the downhill sections). Clearly I need more climbing, and since it&#8217;s already pretty hard to count to 12 while running I started adding the orange section to make the hill part of the repeat longer so I didn&#8217;t have to count so high.

{% responsive_image path: wp-content/uploads/2017/05/hillrepeats1.png)

This is todays run and you can see after my warmup of about 1.25 miles I did 7 repeats on the combined orange and red sections and 3 on the red section alone. I only have to count to 10 but added about 300ft of climbing. Still not a whole lot compared to what I expect on Pikes Peak, but I&#8217;m a flatlander training on flat land and making do.

**New Toys**

For the run I will need to carry my own water and I decided it&#8217;s probably a good idea to also get a pair of trail running shoes. I went down to the local running shop and they didn&#8217;t have any trail running shoes because this is Long Island and you don&#8217;t need trail running shoes for the trails around here. They also only had one hydration backpack that was too small. To the internet! I read a few reviews and chose the https://www.nathansports.com/vaporair-men-s-hydration-backpack-4532n) (in grey) hydration pack and http://www.saucony.com/en/peregrine-7/27458M.html) (also in grey) trail shoes.

{% responsive_image path: wp-content/uploads/2017/05/nathan.jpg %}

The hydration pack is good, comes with lots of pockets, and a 2L bladder for water. I&#8217;ve been using it for my hill repeat workouts and while I know it&#8217;s there it doesn&#8217;t get in the way. I don&#8217;t have anything to compare it to, but there are no problems I&#8217;ve encountered.

{% responsive_image path: wp-content/uploads/2017/05/shoes1.jpg %}

I&#8217;m also happy with the trail shoes, although again I don&#8217;t have anything to really compare them to other than my road shoes which are minimalist type Saucony Kinvaras. I probably should have taken pictures before I used them, but I didn&#8217;t so you get to see my dirty shoes &#8211; just be glad you don&#8217;t have to smell them.

Speaking of dirty/gross pictures the following pictures in this post contain blood so be forewarned.

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

Ok that should be enough space.

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

Last chance to turn back&#8230;

**Blisters!**

Blisters can sideline even the most well laid plans (see my {% responsive_image path: index.php/2017/04/10/2010-ironman-france/)), but they are an inevitable pain for most runners, especially when dealing with new shoes. And not only did I get new trail running shoes but also new road running shoes, and after my first run in the road running shoes I got a blister. I&#8217;ve found the best way to deal with blisters is to drain them and leave them, the skin covering the blister will serve to protect it somewhat and allow faster healing. If you must run with a blister, cover it with vaseline and if it&#8217;s extra bad maybe some duct tape (although duct tape has never stayed on my foot very long while running).

After my long run in my new road running shoes I drained my new blister and made the mistake of peeling away the protective skin. Which led to a strange feeling during my next run (which happened to be a hill workout in my new trail running shoes). About halfway through the run I felt the insole starting to slip around the inside of the shoe &#8211; not a whole lot or enough to get new shoes over, but noticeable. I thought maybe I was sweating too much, and not too concerned. Well I finished the run took off my shoes and saw this:

{% responsive_image path: wp-content/uploads/2017/05/shoeblood0.jpg %}

Ok so it wasn&#8217;t sweat, it was blood. Eek. That looks worse than it really was, here&#8217;s my foot after a quick rinse:

{% responsive_image path: wp-content/uploads/2017/05/shoeblood1.jpg %}

Not so bad after all. It hasn&#8217;t bled like that in subsequent runs and the insole hasn&#8217;t slipped around anymore so all is well. Except the state of my shoes, they&#8217;re filthy and blood stained now.

{% responsive_image path: wp-content/uploads/2017/05/shoeblood.jpg %}

That&#8217;s it for my training update. Hopefully my next Pikes Peak post is a successful &#8220;race&#8221; report.
